---
order:      199
category:   Research Papers
cols:       100
---
<!--

2015

Eva‐Maria Herbst, Fabian Maschler, Fabio Niephaus, Max Reimann, Julia Steier, Tim Felgentreff, Jens Lincke, Marcel Taeumel, Robert Hirschfeld, and Carsten Witt. ecoControl: Entwurf und Implementierung einer Software zur Optimierung heterogener Energiesysteme in Mehrfamilienhäusern. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 93, 2015, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Tobias Pape, Carl Friedrich Bolz, and Robert Hirschfeld. Adaptive Just-in-time Value Class Optimization: Transparent Data Structure Inlining for Fast Execution. In Proceedings of the Object-oriented Programming Languages and Systems (OOPS) Track of the ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC) 2015, pages 1970-1977, Salamanca, Spain, April 13-17, 2015, ACM Press. (pdf)
Shigeru Chiba, Éric Tanter, Erik Ernst, and Robert Hirschfeld (eds.). Transactions on Aspect-Oriented Software Development XII. Springer LNCS 8989, 2015, Springer. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld. Recent Developments in Context-oriented Programming. Keynote, Workshop on Foundations of Aspect-Oriented Languages (FOAL), co-located with Modularity, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA, March 16, 2015. (pdf)
2014

Benjamin Siegmund, Michael Perscheid, Marcel Taeumel, and Robert Hirschfeld. Studying the Advancement in Debugging Practice of Professional Software Developers. In Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Program Debugging (IWPD) 2014, co-located with the IEEE Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE), Naples, Italy, November 3-6, 2014, IEEE. (pdf)
Tim Felgentreff, Alan Borning, and Robert Hirschfeld. Babelsberg: Specifying and Solving Constraints on Object Behavior. In Journal of Object Technology (JOT), vol. 13, no. 4, pages 1:1-38, 2014, www.jot.fm, doi:10.5381/jot.2014.13.4.a1. (pdf)
Marcel Taeumel, Michael Perscheid, Bastian Steinert, Jens Lincke, and Robert Hirschfeld. Interleaving of Modification and Use in Data-driven Tool Development. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium for New Ideas, New Paradigms, and Reflections on Everything to do with Programming and Software (Onward!) 2014, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2014, pages 185-200, Portland, Oregon, USA, October 22-24, 2014, ACM DL. (pdf)
Bert Freudenberg, Dan Ingalls, Tim Felgentreff, Tobias Pape, and Robert Hirschfeld. SqueakJS - A Modern and Practical Smalltalk That Runs in Any Browser. In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2014, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2014, pages 57-66, Portland, Oregon, USA, October 21, 2014, ACM DL. (pdf)
Bastian Steinert, Lauritz Thamsen, Tim Felgentreff, and Robert Hirschfeld. Object Versioning to Support Recovery Needs: Using Proxies to Preserve Previous Development States in Lively. In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2014, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2014, pages 113-124, Portland, Oregon, USA, October 21, 2014, ACM DL. (pdf)
Eric Seckler and Robert Hirschfeld. Archipelago: A Research Platform for Component Interaction in Distributed Applications. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Reactive and Event-based Languages and Systems (REBLS) 2014, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2014, Portland, Oregon, USA, October 21, 2014. (pdf)
Maria Graber, Tim Felgentreff, Robert Hirschfeld, and Alan Borning. Solving Interactive Logic Puzzles With Object-Constraints: An Experience Report Using Babelsberg/S for Squeak/Smalltalk. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Reactive and Event-based Languages and Systems (REBLS) 2014, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2014, Portland, Oregon, USA, October 21, 2014. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Hidehiko Masuhara, Atsushi Igarashi, and Tim Felgentreff. Visibility of Context-oriented Behavior and State in L. Japan Society for Software Science and Technology (JSSST) Annual Conference, Nagoya, Aichi-ken, Japan, September 8, 2014. (pdf)
Christoph Meinel, Hasso Plattner, Jürgen Döllner, Mathias Weske, Andreas Polze, Robert Hirschfeld, Felix Naumann, Holger Giese, and Patrick Baudisch (eds.). Proceedings of the 7th Ph.D. Retreat of the HPI Research School on Service-oriented Systems Engineering. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 83, 2014, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Tim Felgentreff, Todd Millstein, and Alan Borning. Developing a Formal Semantics for Babelsberg: A Step-by-Step Approach. (Draft) VPRI Technical Report TR-2014-002, Viewpoints Research Institute. (pdf)
Tim Felgentreff, Alan Borning, Jens Lincke, Robert Hirschfeld, Yoshiki Ohshima, Bert Freudenberg, and Robert Krahn. Babelsberg/JS - A Browser-based Implementation of an Object Constraint Language. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP), Uppsala, Sweden, July 28-August 1, 2014, Springer. (pdf)
Marcel Taeumel, Tim Felgentreff, and Robert Hirschfeld. Applying Data-driven Tool Development to Context-oriented Languages. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2014, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP), Uppsala, Sweden, July 29, 2014, ACM DL. (pdf)
Hiroaki Inoue, Atsushi Igarashi, Malte Appeltauer, and Robert Hirschfeld. Towards Type-Safe JCop. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2014, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP), Uppsala, Sweden, July 29, 2014, ACM DL. (pdf)
Walter Binder, Achille Peternier, Erik Ernst, and Robert Hirschfeld. MODULARITY-14 (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of the Conference on Modularity (MODULARITY/AOSD) 2014. Lugano, Switzerland, April 22-26, 2014, ACM DL. (pdf)
Walter Binder, Achille Peternier, Erik Ernst, and Robert Hirschfeld. Proceedings of the Conference on Modularity (MODULARITY/AOSD) 2014. Lugano, Switzerland, April 22-26, 2014, ACM DL. (acm)
Vasily Kirilichev, Eric Seckler, Benjamin Siegmund, Michael Perscheid, and Robert Hirschfeld. Stepwise Back-in-time Debugging. In Proceedings of GI Informatiktage 2014, Potsdam, Germany, March 27-28, 2014, GI. (pdf)
Bastian Steinert and Robert Hirschfeld. How to Compare Performance in Program Design Activities: Towards an EmpiricalEvaluationofCoExist. In Hasso Plattner, Christoph Meinel, and Larry Leifer (eds.). Design Thinking Research: Building Innovation Eco-Systems. pages 219-238, Springer 2014, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-01303-9_14. (pdf)
Michael Perscheid, Tim Felgentreff, and Robert Hirschfeld. Follow the Path: Debugging State Anomalies Along Execution Histories. In Proceedings of the IEEE European Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering and the Working Conference on Reverse Engineering (CSMR-WCRE) 2014 Software Evolution Week, pages 124-133, Antwerp, Belgium, February 3-6, 2014, IEEE. (pdf)
Michael Perscheid and Robert Hirschfeld. Follow the Path: Debugging Tools for Test-driven Fault Navigation. In Tool Demo Track of the IEEE European Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering and the Working Conference on Reverse Engineering (CSMR-WCRE) 2014 Software Evolution Week, pages 446-449, Antwerp, Belgium, February 3-6, 2014, IEEE. (pdf)
2013

Tobias Pape, Arian Treffer, Robert Hirschfeld, and Michael Haupt. Extending a Java Virtual Machine to Dynamic Object-oriented Languages. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 82, 2013, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Tim Felgentreff, Alan Borning, and Robert Hirschfeld. Babelsberg: Specifying and Solving Constraints on Object Behavior. Joint TR with Viewpoints Research Institute (VPRI), HPI Technical Reports, vol. 81, 2013, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Robert Hirschfeld and Bernd Brügge. Onward! (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of Onward! 2013, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2013, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA, October 29-31, 2013, ACM DL. (pdf)
Marcel Weiher and Robert Hirschfeld. Polymorphic Identifiers: Uniform Resource Access in Objective-Smalltalk. In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2013, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2013, pages 61-71, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA, October 28, 2013, ACM DL. (pdf)
Carl Friedrich Bolz and Robert Hirschfeld. Dynamic Languages Symposium (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2013, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2013, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA, October 28, 2013, ACM DL. (pdf)
Jens Lincke and Robert Hirschfeld. User-evolvable Tools in the Web. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Open Collaboration (OpenSym) 2013 Free, Libre, and Open Source Software (FLOSS) Research Track, Hong Kong, China, August 5-7, 2013, ACM DL. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Hidehiko Masuhara, and Atsushi Igarashi. Layer and Object Refinement for Context-oriented Programming in L. Information Processing Society of Japan Special Interest Group on Programming (IPSJ-SIGPRO) Workshop, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka-ken, Japan, August 2, 2013. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Hidehiko Masuhara, and Atsushi Igarashi. L – Context-oriented Programming With Only Layers. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2013, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2013, Montpellier, France, July 2, 2013, ACM DL. (pdf)
Christoph Meinel, Hasso Plattner, Jürgen Döllner, Mathias Weske, Andreas Polze, Robert Hirschfeld, Felix Naumann, Holger Giese, and Patrick Baudisch (eds.). Proceedings of the 6th Ph.D. Retreat of the HPI Research School on Service-oriented Systems Engineering. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 76, 2013, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Conrad Calmez, Hubert Hesse, Benjamin Siegmund, Sebastian Stamm, Astrid Thomschke, Robert Hirschfeld, Dan Ingalls, and Jens Lincke. Explorative Authoring of Active Web Content in a Mobile Environment. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 72, 2013, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Lenoid Berov, Johannes Henning, Toni Mattis, Patrick Rein, Robin Schreiber, Eric Seckler, Bastian Steinert, and Robert Hirschfeld. Vereinfachung der Entwicklung von Geschäftsanwendungen durch Konsolidierung von Programmierkonzepten und -technologien. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 71, 2013, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Tim Felgentreff, Michael Perscheid, and Robert Hirschfeld. Constraining Timing-dependent Communication for Debugging Non-deterministic Failures. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Academic Software Development Tools and Techniques (WASDeTT-4) 2013, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2013, Montpellier, France, July 1, 2013. (pdf)
Malte Appeltauer, Robert Hirschfeld, and Jens Lincke. Declarative Layer Composition With the JCop Programming Language. In Journal of Object Technology (JOT), vol. 12, no. 2, pages 4:1-37, 2013, www.jot.fm, doi:10.5381/jot.2013.12.2.a4. (pdf)
2012

Malte Appeltauer and Robert Hirschfeld. The JCop Language Specification. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 59, 2012, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Atsushi Igarashi, Robert Hirschfeld, and Hidehiko Masuhara. A Type System for Dynamic Layer Composition. In Proceedings of the Workshop on the Foundations of Object-oriented Languages (FOOL), co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2012, Tucson, Arizona, USA, October 22, 2012, ACM DL. (pdf)
Bastian Steinert, Damien Cassou, and Robert Hirschfeld. CoExist: Overcoming Aversion to Change – Preserving Immediate Access to Source Code and Run-time Information of Previous Development States. In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2012, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2012, pages 107-117, Tucson, Arizona, USA, October 22, 2012, ACM DL. (pdf)
Marcel Taeumel, Bastian Steinert, and Robert Hirschfeld. The VIVIDE Programming Environment: Connecting Run-time Information with Programmers' System Knowledge. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium for New Ideas, New Paradigms, and Reflections on Everything to do with Programming and Software (Onward!) 2012, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2012, pages 117-126, Tucson, Arizona, USA, October 19-26, 2012, ACM DL. (pdf)
Alessandro Warth and Robert Hirschfeld. Dynamic Languages Symposium (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2012, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2012, Tucson, Arizona, USA, October 22, 2012, ACM DL. (pdf)
Jens Lincke and Robert Hirschfeld. Programming in the Cloud: Context-oriented Programming for Self-supporting Development Environments. Sino-German Workshop on Cloud-based High Performance Computing (C-HPC) 2012, Hasso-Plattner-Institute, Potsdam, Germany, October 22-25, 2012. (pdf)
Bastian Steinert, Marcel Taeumel, Damien Cassou, and Robert Hirschfeld. Adopting Design Practices for Programming. In Hasso Plattner, Christoph Meinel, and Larry Leifer (eds.). Design Thinking Research: Measuring Performance in Context. pages 247-262, Springer 2012, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-31991-4_14. (pdf)
Jens Lincke and Robert Hirschfeld. Scoping Changes in Self-supporting Development Environments using Context-oriented Programming. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2012, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2012, Beijing, China, June 11, 2012, ACM DL. (pdf)
Malte Appeltauer and Robert Hirschfeld. Declarative Layer Composition in Framework-based Environments. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2012, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2012, Beijing, China, June 11, 2012, ACM DL. (pdf)
Michael Perscheid, Michael Haupt, Robert Hirschfeld, and Hidehiko Masuhara. Test-driven Fault Navigation for Debugging Reproducible Failures. In Journal on Information and Media Technologies, vol. 7, no. 4, pages 1377-1400 (reprinted from Computer Software, vol. 29, no. 3), 2012, Japan. (pdf)
Michael Perscheid, Michael Haupt, Robert Hirschfeld, and Hidehiko Masuhara. Test-driven Fault Navigation for Debugging Reproducible Failures. In Journal of the Japan Society for Software Science and Technology (JSSST) on Computer Software, vol. 29, no. 3, pages 188-211, 2012, Japan. (pdf)
Matthias Kleine, Robert Hirschfeld, and Gilad Bracha. An Abstraction for Version Control Systems. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 54, 2012, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Jens Lincke and Robert Hirschfeld (eds.). Web-based Development in the Lively Kernel. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 53, 2012, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Robert Hirschfeld, Michael Haupt, Eric Tanter, Kevin Sullivan, and Richard P. Gabriel. MODULARITY:aosd-12 (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of the Conference on Aspect-oriented Software Development (AOSD) 2012, Potsdam, Germany, March 25-30, ACM DL. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Michael Haupt, Eric Tanter, Kevin Sullivan, and Richard P. Gabriel. Proceedings of the Conference on Aspect-oriented Software Development (AOSD) 2012. Potsdam, Germany, March 25-30, ACM DL. (acm)
Robert Krahn, Jens Lincke, and Robert Hirschfeld. Efficient Layer Activation in ContextJS. In Proceedings of the Conference on Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through Computing (C5) 2012, Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California, Playa Vista, California, USA, January 18-20, 2012, IEEE. (pdf)
Michael Perscheid, Damien Cassou, and Robert Hirschfeld. Test Quality Feedback: Improving Effectivity and Efficiency of Unit Testing. In Proceedings of the Conference on Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through Computing (C5) 2012, pages 60-67, Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California, Playa Vista, California, USA, January 18-20, 2012, IEEE. (pdf)
Lauritz Thamsen, Anton Gulenko, Michael Perscheid, Robert Krahn, Robert Hirschfeld, and David A. Thomas. Orca: A Single-language Web Framework for Collaborative Development. In Proceedings of the Conference on Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through Computing (C5) 2012, pages 45-52, Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California, Playa Vista, California, USA, January 18-20, 2012, IEEE. (pdf)
Jens Lincke, Robert Krahn, Dan Ingalls, Marko Röder, and Robert Hirschfeld. The Lively PartsBin: A Cloud-based Repository for Collaborative Development of Active Web Content. In Proceedings of Collaboration Systems and Technology Track at the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS) 2012, pages 693-701, Grand Wailea, Maui, Hawaii, USA, January 4-7, 2012, IEEE Computer. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Shriram Krishnamurthi, and Jan Vitek (eds.). Foundations for Scripting Languages (Dagstuhl Seminar 12011). Schloss Dagstuhl, Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2012, Germany. (pdf, drops)
2011

Michael Haupt, Stefan Marr, and Robert Hirschfeld. CSOM/PL: A Virtual Machine Product Line. In Journal of Object Technology (JOT), vol. 10, no. 12, pages 1-30, 2011, www.jot.fm, doi:10.5381/jot.2011.10.1.a12. (pdf)
Bastian Steinert and Robert Hirschfeld. Applying Design Knowledge to Programming. In Hasso Plattner, Christoph Meinel, and Larry Leifer (eds.). Design Thinking Research: Studying Co-creation in Practice. pages 259-277, Springer 2011, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-21643-5_15. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Michael Perscheid, and Michael Haupt. Explicit Use-case Representation in Object-oriented Programming Languages. In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2011, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2011, pages 51-60, Portland, Oregon, USA, October 24, 2011, ACM DL. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld. Onward! (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of Onward! 2011, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2011, Portland, Oregon, USA, October 22-27, 2011, ACM DL. (pdf)
Theo D'Hondt and Robert Hirschfeld. Dynamic Languages Symposium (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2011, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2011, Portland, Oregon, USA, October 24, 2011, ACM DL. (pdf)
Michael Perscheid, Michael Haupt, Robert Hirschfeld, and Hidehiko Masuhara. Test-Driven Fault Navigation for Debugging Reproducible Failures. In Proceedings of the JSSST Annual Conference 2011, Naha, Okinawa, Japan, September 27-29, 2011.
Robert Hirschfeld, Jens Lincke, and Robert Krahn. The Lively Cloud: A Programming and Deployment Environment for End-user Applications in the Web. Sino-German Workshop on Cloud-based High Performance Computing (C-HPC) 2011, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China, September 27-29, 2011. (pdf)
Michael Haupt, Stefan Marr, and Robert Hirschfeld. CSOM/PL: A Virtual Machine Product Line. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 48, 2011, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Christoph Meinel, Hasso Plattner, Jürgen Döllner, Mathias Weske, Andreas Polze, Robert Hirschfeld, Felix Naumann, and Holger Giese (eds.). Proceedings of the 5th Ph.D. Retreat of the HPI Research School on Service-oriented Systems Engineering. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 46, 2011, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Tobias Rho, Malte Appeltauer, Stephan Lerche, Armin B. Cremers, and Robert Hirschfeld. A Context Management Infrastructure with Language Integration Support. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2011, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2011, Lancaster, UK, July 25, 2011, ACM DL. (pdf)
Christopher Schuster, Malte Appeltauer, and Robert Hirschfeld. Context-oriented Programming for Mobile Devices: JCop on Android. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2011, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2011, Lancaster, UK, July 25, 2011, ACM DL. (pdf)
Jens Lincke, Robert Krahn, and Robert Hirschfeld. Implementing Scoped Method Tracing with ContextJS. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2011, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2011, Lancaster, UK, July 25, 2011, ACM DL. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Atsushi Igarashi, and Hidehiko Masuhara. ContextFJ: A Minimal Core Calculus for Context-oriented Programming. In Proceedings of the Workshop on the Foundations of Aspect-oriented Languages (FOAL), co-located with the Conference on Aspect-oriented Software Development (AOSD) 2011, Porto de Galinhas, Pernambuco, Brazil, March 21, 2011, ACM DL. (pdf)
Michael Haupt, Michael Perscheid, and Robert Hirschfeld. Type Harvesting: A Practical Approach to Obtaining Typing Information in Dynamic Programming Languages. In Proceedings of the Object-oriented Programming Languages and Systems (OOPS) Track of the ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC) 2011, pages 1282-1289, Tunghai University, TaiChung, Taiwan, March 21-24, 2011, ACM Press. (pdf)
Malte Appeltauer, Robert Hirschfeld, Michael Haupt, and Hidehiko Masuhara. ContextJ: Context-oriented Programming with Java. In Journal of the Japan Society for Software Science and Technology (JSSST) on Computer Software, vol. 28, no. 1, pages 272-292, 2011, Japan. (pdf, jstage.jst.go.jp)
Jens Lincke, Malte Appeltauer, Bastian Steinert, and Robert Hirschfeld. An Open Implementation for Context-oriented Layer Composition in ContextJS. In Elsevier Journal on Science of Computer Programming, Special Issue on Software Evolution, vol. 76, no. 12, pages 1194-1209, 2011, doi:10.1016/j.scico.2010.11.013. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Bastian Steinert, and Jens Lincke. Agile Software Development in Virtual Collaboration Environments. In Hasso Plattner, Christoph Meinel, and Larry Leifer (eds.). Design Thinking: Understand-Improve-Apply. pages 197-218, Springer 2011, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-13757-0_12. (pdf)
2010

Michael Haupt and Robert Hirschfeld (eds.). Selected Papers of the International Workshop on Smalltalk Technologies (IWST) 2010. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 40, 2010, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
William D. Clinger and Robert Hirschfeld. Dynamic Languages Symposium (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2010, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2010, Reno, Nevada, USA, October 18, 2010, ACM DL. (pdf)
Michael Perscheid, Bastian Steinert, Robert Hirschfeld, Felix Geller, and Michael Haupt. Immediacy through Interactivity: Online Analysis of Run-time Behavior. In Proceedings of the 17th Working Conference on Reverse Engineerings (WCRE) 2010, pages 77-86, Beverly, Massachusetts, USA, October 13-16, 2010, IEEE. (pdf)
Tim Molderez, Hans Schippers, Dirk Janssens, Michael Haupt, and Robert Hirschfeld. A Platform for Experimenting with Language Constructs for Modularizing Crosscutting Concerns. In Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Academic Software Development Tools and Techniques (WASDeTT-3) 2010, co-located with the Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) 2010, pages 129-145, Antwerp, Belgium, September 20-24, 2010. (pdf, proceedings)
Felix Geller, Robert Hirschfeld, and Gilad Bracha. Pattern Matching for an Object-oriented and Dynamically Typed Programming Language. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 36, 2010, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Malte Appeltauer, Michael Haupt, and Robert Hirschfeld. Layered Method Dispatch With INVOKEDYNAMIC. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2010, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2010, Maribor, Slovenia, June 22, 2010, ACM DL. (pdf)
Benjamin Hosain Wasty, Amir Semmo, Malte Appeltauer, Bastian Steinert, and Robert Hirschfeld. ContextLua - Dynamic Behavioral Variations in Computer Games. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2010, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2010, Maribor, Slovenia, June 22, 2010, ACM DL. (pdf)
Malte Appeltauer, Robert Hirschfeld, Hidehiko Masuhara, Michael Haupt, and Kazunori Kawauchi. Event-specific Software Composition in Context-oriented Programming. In Proceedings of the Conference on Software Composition (SC) 2010, Springer LNCS 6144, pages 50-65, Malaga, Spain, July 1-2, 2010, Springer. (pdf)
Michael Haupt, Michael Perscheid, Robert Hirschfeld, Lysann Kessler, Thomas Klingbeil, Stephanie Platz, Frank Schlegel, and Philipp Tessenow. PhidgetLab: Crossing the Border from Virtual to Real-World Objects. In Proceedings the Conference of Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education (ITiCSE) 2010, Bilkent, Ankara, Turkey, June 26-30, 2010, ACM DL. (pdf)
Michael Haupt, Robert Hirschfeld, Tobias Pape, Gregor Gabrysiak, Stefan Marr, Arne Bergmann, Arvid Heise, Matthias Kleine, and Robert Krahn. The SOM Family: Virtual Machines for Teaching and Research. In Proceedings the Conference of Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education (ITiCSE) 2010, Bilkent, Ankara, Turkey, June 26-30, 2010, ACM DL. (pdf)
Christoph Meinel, Hasso Plattner, Jürgen Döllner, Mathias Weske, Andreas Polze, Robert Hirschfeld, Felix Naumann, and Holger Giese (eds.). Proceedings of the 4th Ph.D. Retreat of the HPI Research School on Service-oriented Systems Engineering. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 31, 2010, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Bastian Steinert, Michael Haupt, Robert Krahn, and Robert Hirschfeld. Continuous Selective Testing. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Agile Software Development (XP) 2010, Springer LNBIP 48, pages 132-146, Trondheim, Norway, June 1-4, 2010, Springer. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Michael Perscheid, Christian Schubert, and Malte Appeltauer. Dynamic Contract Layers. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC) 2010, pages 2169-2175, Sierre, Switzerland, March 22-26, 2010, ACM Press. (pdf)
Bastian Steinert, Marcel Taeumel, Jens Lincke, Tobias Pape, and Robert Hirschfeld. CodeTalk-Conversations About Code. In Proceedings of the Conference on Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through Computing (C5) 2010, pages 11-18, San Diego, California, USA, January 25-27, 2010, IEEE. (pdf)
2009

Bastian Steinert, Michael Grunewald, Stefan Richter, Jens Lincke, and Robert Hirschfeld. Multi-user Multi-account Interaction in Groupware Supporting Single-display Collaboration. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Collaborative Computing: Networking, Applications and Worksharing (CollaborateCom) 2009, Crystal City, Washington D.C., USA, November 11-14, 2009, IEEE, doi:10.4108/ICST.COLLABORATECOM2009.8290. (pdf)
Bastian Steinert, Michael Perscheid, Martin Beck, Jens Lincke, and Robert Hirschfeld. Debugging into Examples - Leveraging Tests for Program Comprehension. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Testing of Software and Communication Systems and the International Workshop on Formal Approaches to Testing of Software (TESTCOM/FATES) 2009, Springer LNCS 5826, pages 235-240, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, November 2-4, 2009, Springer. (pdf)
Christoph Meinel, Hasso Plattner, Jürgen Döllner, Mathias Weske, Andreas Polze, Robert Hirschfeld, Felix Naumann, and Holger Giese (eds.). Proceedings of the 3rd Ph.D. Retreat of the HPI Research School on Service-oriented Systems Engineering. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 27, 2009, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
James Noble and Robert Hirschfeld. Dynamic Languages Symposium (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2009, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2009, Orlando, Florida, USA, October 26, 2009, ACM DL. (pdf)
Malte Appeltauer, Robert Hirschfeld, Michael Haupt, and Hidehiko Masuhara ContextJ: Context-oriented Programming with Java. In Proceedings of the JSSST Annual Conference 2009, 2D-1, Shimane University, Matsue, Shimane, Japan, September 16-18, 2009.
Martin Beck, Michael Haupt, and Robert Hirschfeld. NXTalk: Dynamic Object-oriented Programming in a Constrained Environment. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Smalltalk Technologies (IWST) 2009, Brest, France, August 31, 2009, ACM DL. (pdf)
Thomas Kowark, Robert Hirschfeld, and Michael Haupt. Object-Relational Mapping with SqueakSave. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Smalltalk Technologies (IWST) 2009, Brest, France, August 31, 2009, ACM DL. (pdf)
Robert Krahn, Dan Ingalls, Robert Hirschfeld, Jens Lincke, and Krzysztof Palacz. Lively Wiki - A Development Environment for Creating and Sharing Active Web Content. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration (WikiSym) 2009, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2009, Disney's Contemporary Resort, Orlando, Florida, USA, October 25-27, 2009, ACM DL. (pdf)
Malte Appeltauer, Robert Hirschfeld, and Hidehiko Masuhara. Improving the Development of Context-dependent Java Applications with ContextJ. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2009, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2009, Genoa, Italy, July 7, 2009, ACM DL. (pdf)
Malte Appeltauer, Robert Hirschfeld, Michael Haupt, Jens Lincke, and Michael Perscheid. A Comparison of Context-oriented Programming Languages. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2009, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2009, Genoa, Italy, July 7, 2009, ACM DL. (pdf)
Pascal Costanza, Richard P. Gabriel, Robert Hirschfeld, and Jorge Vallejos. International Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (Frontmatter). In Proceedings of the Workshop on Context-oriented Programming (COP) 2009, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2009, Genoa, Italy, July 7, 2009, ACM DL. (pdf)
Hans Schippers, Tom Van Cutsem, Stefan Marr, Michael Haupt, and Robert Hirschfeld. Towards an Actor-based Concurrent Machine Model. In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Implementation, Compilation, Optimization of Object-oriented Languages, Programs and Systems (ICOOOLPS) 2009, pages 4-9, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2009, Genoa, Italy, July 6, 2009, ACM DL. (pdf)
Michael Haupt, Bram Adams, Stijn Timbermont, Celina Gibbs, Yvonne Coady, and Robert Hirschfeld. Disentangling Virtual Machine Architecture. In IET Journal on Software, Special Issue on Domain-Specific Aspect Languages, vol. 3, no. 3, pages 201-218, June 2009. (pdf)
Hans Schippers, Michael Haupt, and Robert Hirschfeld. An Implementation Substrate for Languages Composing Modularized Crosscutting Concerns. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC) 2009, pages 1944-1951, Waikiki Beach, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, March 9-12, 2009, ACM Press. (pdf)
Jens Lincke, Robert Krahn, Dan Ingalls, and Robert Hirschfeld. Lively Fabrik - A Web-based End-user Programming Environment. In Proceedings of the Conference on Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through Computing (C5) 2009, pages 11-19, Kyoto, Japan, January 19-22, 2009, IEEE. (pdf)
Philipp Engelhard, Robert Hirschfeld, and Jens Lincke. Pitsupai - Collaborative Scripting in a distributed, persistent 3D World. In Proceedings of the Conference on Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through Computing (C5) 2009, pages 87-94, Kyoto, Japan, January 19-22, 2009, IEEE. (pdf)
Norman Holz, Robert Hirschfeld, Jens Lincke, Michael Rüger, and Michael Haupt. Sophie - Tools and Materials in Multimedia Book Creation. In Proceedings of the Conference on Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through Computing (C5) 2009, pages 20-26, Kyoto, Japan, January 19-22, 2009, IEEE. (pdf)
2008

Robert Hirschfeld and Kim Rose (eds.). Self-Sustaining Systems. Proceedings of the First Workshop on Self-sustaining Systems (S3) 2008, Springer LNCS 5146, Potsdam, Germany, May 15-16, 2008, Springer. (springer)
Christoph Meinel, Andreas Polze, Mathias Weske, Juergen Doellner, Robert Hirschfeld, Felix Naumann, Holger Giese, and Hasso Plattner (eds.). Proceedings of the 2nd Ph.D. Retreat of the HPI Research School on Service-oriented Systems Engineering. HPI Technical Reports, vol. 23, 2008, Hasso-Plattner-Institute. (pdf, hpi)
Hans Schippers, Dirk Janssens, Michael Haupt, and Robert Hirschfeld. Delegation-based Semantics for Modularizing Crosscutting Concerns. In Proceedings of the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2008, pages 525-542, Nashville, Tennessee, USA, October 19-23, 2008. (pdf)
Pascal Costanza, Richard P. Gabriel, Robert Hirschfeld, and Guy L. Steele, Jr. Lisp50 – The 50th Birthday of Lisp at OOPSLA 2008. In Companion of the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2008, pages 853-854, Nashville, Tennessee, USA, October 19-23, 2008. (pdf)
Malte Appeltauer, Robert Hirschfeld, and Tobias Rho. Dedicated Programming Support for Context-aware Ubiquitous Applications. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies (UBICOMM) 2008, pages 38-43, IEEE Computer Society Press, Valencia, Spain, September 29 - October 4, 2008, IEEE, doi:10.1109/UBICOMM.2008.56. (pdf)
Malte Appeltauer and Robert Hirschfeld. Explicit Language and Infrastructure Support for Context-aware Services. In Proceedings of INFORMATIK 2008 - Beherrschbare Systeme dank Informatik, Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), P-134, pages 38-43, Gesellschaft für Informatik (GI), München, Germany, 2008. (pdf)
Michael Perscheid, David Tibbe, Martin Beck, Stefan Berger, Peter Osburg, Jeff Eastman, Michael Haupt, and Robert Hirschfeld. An Introduction to Seaside - Developing Web Applications with Squeak and Smalltalk. Lulu, 2008. (lulu, amazon)
Robert Hirschfeld. Dynamic Adaptation - Changing Services at Runtime. In Hendrik Berndt (ed.), Towards 4G Technologies: Services with Initiative, Wiley Series on Communications Networking & Distributed Systems, Wiley, 2008. (wiley, amazon)
Robert Hirschfeld, Pascal Costanza, and Oscar Nierstrasz. Context-oriented Programming. In Journal of Object Technology (JOT), vol. 7, no. 3, pages 125-151, March - April 2008, www.jot.fm. (pdf)
Jan Wloka, Robert Hirschfeld, and Joachim Hänsel. Tool-supported Refactoring of Aspect-oriented Programs. In Proceedings of the Conference on Aspect-oriented Software Development (AOSD) 2008, pages 132-143, Brussels, Belgium, March 31 - April 4, 2008. (pdf)
Jens Lincke, Robert Hirschfeld, Michael Rüger, and Maic Masuch. SophieScript - Active Content in Multimedia Documents. In Proceedings of the Conference on Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through Computing (C5) 2008, pages 21-28, Poitiers, France, January 14-16, 2008, IEEE. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Michael Haupt, Michael Rüger, Patrick Brünn, Ronny Esterluß, Norman Holz, Kerstin Knebel, and Robert Timm. SophieServer - The Future of Reading. In Proceedings of the Conference on Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through Computing (C5) 2008, pages 29-35, Poitiers, France, January 14-16, 2008, IEEE. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Pascal Costanza, and Michael Haupt. An Introduction to Context-oriented Programming with ContextS. In Generative and Transformational Techniques in Software Engineering (GTTSE) II, Springer LNCS 5235, pages 396-407, Braga, Portugal, July 2-7, 2008, Springer. (pdf)
2007

Johan Brichau, Andy Kellens, Kris Gybels, Kim Mens, Robert Hirschfeld, and Theo D'Hondt. Application-Specific Models and Pointcuts Using a Logic Meta Language. In Elsevier Journal on Computer Languages, Systems & Structures, vol. 34, no. 2-3, July - October 2008, pages 66-82, May 13, 2007, doi:10.1016/j.cl.2007.05.004. (pdf)
Pascal Costanza and Robert Hirschfeld. Dynamic Languages Symposium (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2007, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2007, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, October 22, 2007, ACM DL. (pdf)
Michael Haupt, Robert Hirschfeld, and Marcus Denker. Type Feedback for Bytecode Interpreters. 2nd Workshop on Implementation, Compilation, Optimization of Object-oriented Languages, Programs and Systems (ICOOOLPS) 2007, co-located with the European Conference on Object-oriented Programming (ECOOP) 2007, Berlin, Germany, July 30, 2007. (pdf)
Pascal Costanza and Robert Hirschfeld. Reflective Layer Activation in ContextL. In Proceedings of the Programming for Separation of Concerns (PSC) of the ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC) 2007, pages 1280-1285, Seoul, Korea, March 11-15, 2007, ACM Press. (pdf)
Brecht Desmet, Jorge Vallejos, Pascal Costanza, and Robert Hirschfeld. Layered Design Approach for Context-aware Systems. In Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Variability Modelling of Software-intensive Systems (Lero technical report) 2007. Limerick, Ireland, January 16-18, 2007. (pdf)
Johan Brichau, Andy Kellens, Kris Gybels, Kim Mens, Robert Hirschfeld, and Theo D'Hondt. Application-Specific Models and Pointcuts Using a Logic Meta Language. In Advances in Smalltalk, Springer LNCS 4406, pages 1-22, Springer, 2007. (pdf)
2006

Robert Hirschfeld and William R. Cook. Dynamic Languages Symposium (Chair's Welcome). In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2006, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2006, Portland, Oregon, USA, October 23, 2006, ACM DL. (pdf)
Pascal Costanza, Robert Hirschfeld, and Wolfgang De Meuter. Efficient Layer Activation for Switching Context-dependent Behavior. In Proceedings of the Joint Modular Languages Conference (JMLC) 2006, Springer LNCS 4228, pages 84-103, Oxford, England, September 13-15, 2006, Springer. (pdf)
Alexandre Bergel, Robert Hirschfeld, Siobhan Clarke, and Pascal Costanza. AspectBoxes - Controlling the Visibility of Aspects. In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Software and Data Technologies (ICSOFT) 2006, Springer CCIS 10, pages 74-83, Setubal, Portugal, September 11-14, 2006, Springer.
Robert Hirschfeld and Katsuya Kawamura. Dynamic Service Adaptation. In Software: Practice and Experience, 36(11-12):1115-1131, September-October 2006, Wiley InterScience. (pdf)
2005 and earlier

Robert Hirschfeld and Stefan Hanenberg. Open Aspects. In Elsevier Journal on Computer Languages, Systems & Structures, Science Direct, vol. 32, no. 2-3, July-October 2006, pages 87-108, Elsevier 2005. (pdf)
Pascal Costanza and Robert Hirschfeld. Language Constructs for Context-oriented Programming - An Overview of ContextL. In Proceedings of the Dynamic Languages Symposium (DLS) 2005, co-located with the Conference on Object-oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA) 2005, San Diego, California, USA, October 18, 2005, ACM DL. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Ryszard Kowalczyk, Andreas Polze, and Mathias Weske (eds). NODe 2005 & GSEM 2005. GI Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI) P-69, Gesellschaft für Informatik, 2005. (gi)
Robert Hirschfeld and Ralf Lämmel. Reflective Designs. In IEE Journal on Software, Special Issue on Reusable Software Libraries, vol. 152, no. 1, pages 38-51, February 2005. (pdf)
Tom Mens, Michel Wermelinger, Stephane Ducasse, Serge Demeyer, Robert Hirschfeld, and Mehdi Jazayeri. Challenges in Software Evolution. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Principles of Software Evolution (IWPSE) 2005, IEEE Computer Society Press, pages 13-22, Lisbon, Portugal, September 5-6, 2005, IEEE.
Robert E. Filman, Michael Haupt, and Robert Hirschfeld (eds.). Proceedings of the Second Dynamic Aspects Workshop (DAW) 2005. RIACS Technical Reports, 05.01, 2005, NASA Ames. (pdf)
Stefan Hanenberg, Robert Hirschfeld, and Rainer Unland. Morphing Aspects: Incompletely Woven Aspects and Continuous Weaving. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Aspect-oriented Software Development (AOSD) 2004, pages 46-55, ACM Press, Lancaster, UK, March 22-26, 2004. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Katsuya Kawamura, and Hendrik Berndt. Dynamic Service Adaptation for Runtime System Extensions. In Roberto Battiti, Renato Lo Cigno Cigno, Marco Conti (eds.), Proceedings of Wireless On-Demand Network Systems (WONS) 2004, Springer LNCS 2928, pages 227-240, Springer, 2004. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld, Jeff Eastman, Matthias Wagner, and Hendrik Berndt. Locators - Dynamic Service Composition and System Evolution. In Pascal Costanza, Günter Kniesel (eds.), Proceedings of the 2003 International Workshop on Unanticipated Software Evolution (USE), co-located with the European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software (ETAPS) 2003, pages 50-56, Warsaw, Poland, April 5-6, 2003. (pdf)
Sergei Kojarski, Karl Lieberherr, David H. Lorenz, and Robert Hirschfeld. Aspectual Reflection. In Proceedings of the 2003 International Workshop on Software Engineering Properties of Languages for Aspect Technologies (SPLAT), co-located with the 2nd International Conference on Aspect-Oriented Software Development (AOSD) 2003, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, March 17-21, 2003. (pdf)
Robert Hirschfeld. AspectS – Aspect-oriented Programming with Squeak. In Mehmet Aksit, Mira Mezini, and Rainer Unland (eds.), Proceedings of Objects, Components, Architectures, Services, and Applications for a Networked World, Springer LNCS 2591, pages 216-232, Springer, 2003. (pdf)
Jeff Eastman, Robert Hirschfeld, Matthias Wagner, and Hendrik Berndt. Supporting Services in a Dynamic Distributed Computing Environment. In Proceedings of the TINA Workshop 2002, Petaling Jaya, Malaysia, October 2-4, 2002. (pdf)
Jeff Eastman, Ian Fuller, and Robert Hirschfeld. Service Lifecycle in a Distributed Computing Environment. In Proceedings of the IEEE Telecommunications Information Networking Architecture (TINA) Conference 1999, pages 183-184, Oahu, Hawaii, USA, April 12-15, 1999, IEEE. 

-->
