---
title: Squeak 4.2 Release Notes
order: 420
permalink: /release_notes/4.2.html
rewrite_code_links: true
---

<b>\*\*\* Squeak 4.2 Release Notes \*\*\*</b>  
Released 2011/2/4: <a href="http://ftp.squeak.org/4.2/">http://ftp.squeak.org/4.2/</a>

- Compatible with the new Cog VM which provides roughly a 3x, across-the-board, performance improvement. Specific Benchmarks vary much more widely (from 1x to 5x, with some people claiming 10x for specifics).
- Compatible with signature Squeak packages.  
Many enhancements, fixes, documentation and performance improvements to the class-library and IDE tools.
- Improved package-dependencies.
- A new number parser allows greater flexibility in the expression of numbers.
- Finalization enhancements.
- An interface to the operating system stdio (initially supported only on the Cog VM).
- Stricter Rectangles assert screen coordinate orientation. Empty Rectangles no longer \#intersect: anything.
- A tidier image and code-base. Introduced a cleanUp protocol, removed the last direct users of CrLfFileStream, j3 support, SyntaxError, and more. Various packages and fonts can now be unloaded, if a smaller image is desired.
- Replaced the last of the underscore assignments with ANSI assignments.
- A refactoring and unification of Smalltalk and SmalltalkImage globals.
- Support for translucent fonts.
- Squeak&apos;s internal timer clock has been improved from millisecond to microsecond level precision.
- Many enhancements to the internal text editor.
- Added an efficient window-resizing gesture, allowing Squeak windows to be quickly and easily manipulated.
- A new HelpSystem and Help menu guide new users.
- Restored support for MVC projects.
- SUnit tests now may timeout.
- Improved Squeak&apos;s command-line interface to properly support relative-path qualification to the input script.
