---
title: Squeak 4.5 Release Notes
order: 450
permalink: /release_notes/4.5.html
rewrite_code_links: true
---

<b>\*\*\* Squeak 4.5 &quot;Theodor&quot; Release Notes \*\*\*</b>

<b>Language Improvements</b>

<i>Environments</i>
<i>- </i>Environments allows multiple classes with the same name to exist in the same image, with code referencing through <a href="code://Class&gt;&gt;#environment">Class&gt;&gt;\#environment</a>.

<i>Collections</i>
- New and improved <a href="code://OrderedCollection &gt;&gt; #sorted:">sorting utilities</a> for Arrays and OrderedCollections.
- New <a href="code://FloatCollection">FloatCollection</a> inherits the convenient add:/remove: API of OrderedCollection, but using an internal <a href="code://FloatArray">FloatArray</a> for better efficiency.
- An all-new LRUCache implementation.
- <a href="code://Promise">Promise</a> is now a fully chainable object with decent error handling.

<i>Compiler</i>
- Moved classifying and logging behavior out of Compiler (a responsibility of Behavior).

<i>Numerics</i>
<i>-</i> Faster and better <a href="code://Random">Random</a>.
- Fixes <a href="code://Integer &gt;&gt; #log">\#log</a> and <a href="code://Integer &gt;&gt; #ln">\#ln</a> for integers.

<i>Dates and Times</i>
<i>- </i>New methods <a href="code://Time class &gt;&gt; #utcMicrosecondClock">\#utcMicrosecondClock</a> and <a href="code://Time class &gt;&gt; #localMicrosecondClock">\#localMicrosecondClock</a> provide access to primitive 240 and 241, which can provide microsecond resolution timestamps on Cog VMs.
- New convenience methods allow creating DateAndTime relative to now (e.g., &quot;<a href="code://(DateAndTime now - 5 minutes) explore">DateAndTime now - 5 minutes</a>&quot;).
- Parsing improvements.

<i>Text, Graphics, Sound</i>
<i>- </i><a href="code://Form&gt;&gt;#pixelValueAt:">Form&gt;&gt;\#pixelValueAt:</a> now makes use of the <a href="code://Form &gt;&gt; #primPixelValueAtX:y:">new primitive in BitBlt plugin</a>, avoiding the overhead of a full BitBlt object.
- Elimination of the dual hierarchy of <a href="code://NewParagraph">NewParagraph</a> 
- <a href="code://PaintBoxMorph">PaintBoxMorph</a> re-engineering.
- <a href="code://ADPCMCodec">ADPCMCodec</a> performance improvement.

<b>IDE, Monticello and Trunk process improvements</b>

- Several MVC fixes allow debugging in <a href="code://MVCProject new enter">MVC</a> once again.
- <i>Smart Splitters</i> causes the bars between browser panes to automatically optimize their position.
- Fixed color-selection from anywhere on the screen working again.
- Improved command-line interface via <a href="code://SmalltalkImage&gt;&gt;#run:">SmalltalkImage&gt;&gt;\#run:</a>.
- <a href="code://ContextPart class &gt;&gt; #maxStackDepthForASingleDebugLogReport">squeakDebug.log report length</a> is now settable.
- <a href="code://MCReorganizationPreloader">MCReorganizationPreloader</a> now resolves moves between arbitrary packages, independent of their order in the configuration.
- Monticello&apos;s <i>.mcz</i> files, including its <i>snapshot</i> and <i>source.st</i>, are now encoded in <b>UTF8 instead of Latin-1</b>.
- New pre-selection highlight feature for lists.
- System space analysis now available in Help \| About.
- Message-traces can be paired more easily.

<b>Configuration</b>

- Lots of improvements in the continuous integration (CI) build/test. (<a href="http://ci.squeak.org">http://ci.squeak.org</a>)
- Installer now documents externally-loadable packages as simple literal structures that can be merged via <a href="code://Installer&gt;&gt;#merge:">Installer&gt;&gt;\#merge:</a>.
- Monticello&apos;s ancestry strings can now be stubbed for a smaller image and sustainable <i>Monticello history</i>.

<b>History and Accounting Tools</b>

- A great new historical website by Bob Arning.
- Monticello history and Monticello origin is now available for methods and class-definitions from browser menus.
- A new amazing <b>ObjectHistory</b> makes it possible to efficiently track the born-on date of any object to a resolution of one minute. <font color="#FF0000"><i>Does only affect new objects.</i></font>
- Added &quot;search history&quot; to Package history browser.

<b>Fixes and clean-ups</b>

- Packages organized toward eliminating circular dependencies, and with proper concern for existing and future UI frameworks.
- Updated uses of <a href="code://SmalltalkImage class &gt;&gt; #current">SmalltalkImage current</a> to <a href="code://Smalltalk explore">Smalltalk</a> (global variable)
- Moving away from use of <a href="code://Utilities">Utilities</a>.
- More preferences made <a href="code://Model class &gt;&gt; #useColorfulWindows">pragma-based</a>.
- Compiler factorings and clean-ups.
- Diminished excessive usage of <a href="code://ReadWriteStream">ReadWriteStream</a>.
- <a href="code://ProtoObject">ProtoObject</a> API balanced and minimal.

<b>Compatibility Notes</b>

- Default Float printing is now true to its internal representation.  Apps <b>must</b> now use appropriate methods to format Floats rather than roundTo:.
- ($a to: $b) now returns &apos;ab&apos;, which is a string, rather than \#($a $b), which is an array.
- Remove <a href="code://Symbol">OneCharacterSymbols</a> optimization.
- <a href="code://LRUCache">LRUCache</a> instance migrations, if any.  See post-scripts in Collections-ul.546, 547.
- Rectangles with 0 area (e.g., lines) can now intersect. Try &quot;<a href="code://((10@10 corner: 50@10) intersect: (30@10 corner: 100@10)) explore">(10@10 corner: 50@10) intersect: (30@10 corner: 100@10)</a>&quot;.
- MultiNewParagraph was removed.  Applications should now use <a href="code://NewParagraph">NewParagraph</a>.
