---
title: Squeak 5.1 Release Notes
order: 510
permalink: /release_notes/5.1/
rewrite_code_links: true
# This file was automatically generated. Edit it using:
# SqueakReleaseNotes edit: #v51.
# SqueakReleaseNotes storeKey: #v51 asJekyllFileInDirectoryNamed: '_release_notes'.
---

<b>\*\*\* Squeak 5.1 Release Notes \*\*\*</b>

Note that there is a 32-bit and an <i>experimental</i> 64-bit version of this release. There are currently no means to simply convert a 32-bit image into a 64-bit or vice versa (even with limitations).<font color="#FF0000"> </font>While there is no problem for source code, to transfer objects between images, you have to either serialize them (into source code) or use <a href="code://ToolSet browseHierarchy: DataStream selector: nil">DataStream</a>.

This Squeak release introduces the support for various <a href="code://UserInterfaceTheme">user interface themes</a>. It comes already with several dark and light themes. See the <i>Extras</i> menu in the world docking bar to choose between themes. While all widgets used for system tools are themed, there might one or another morph that still looks awkward in some theme, especially when coming from &quot;MorphicExtras&quot;.

<b>Improvements in Language, Tools, and the Environment</b>

<i>Chronology</i>
- All time, date, timespan etc. related classes were extracted into a custom &quot;Chronology&quot; package to clean-up the &quot;Kernel&quot; package
- Time zone offset works now correctly in <a href="code://DateAndTime now explore">DateAndTime</a>
- Clock is 64-bit based

<i>WebClient</i>
- Support the <i>args</i> variable in <a href="code://HTTPSocket class &gt;&gt; #httpGet:args:user:passwd:">HTTPSocket class &gt;&gt; \#httpGet:args:user:passwd:</a>

<i>Network</i>
- Fixes percentage decoding for URIs
- Fixes parsing email addresses that contain an ampersand
- Several fixes and improvements in <a href="code://Socket">Socket</a>
- Decrease the chance of <a href="code://UUID &gt;&gt; #makeUUID">UUID</a> collision by using the UUIDPlugin if possible and also speed-up in-image UUID generation otherwise
- Adds <a href="code://#isOtherEndConnected">\#isOtherEndConnected</a> and <a href="code://#isThisEndConnected">\#isThisEndConnected</a> for robust network programming
- Fixes in <a href="code://NetNameResolver">NetNameResolver</a>

<i>Compression</i>
- Fixes a bug to avoid creating thousands of file streams when compressing thousands of files

<i>Graphics</i>
- Let <a href="code://FormSetFont">FormSetFont</a> decide whether it should be colorized or not
- Adds a set of <a href="code://Color orderedCrayonColors explore">crayon colors</a> to extend the choice of <a href="code://Color class &gt;&gt; #ocean">named</a> colors
- New version of <a href="code://JPEGReadWriter2">JPEGReadWriter2</a> plugin
- Re-rendered bitmap fonts of &quot;DejaVu Sans&quot;, which is used as the basic font in Squeak. See <a href="https://github.com/krono/Squeak-Fonts">https://github.com/krono/Squeak-Fonts</a>
- New font sizes for default font. Now we have \#(7 9 12 14 17 20), which should also work for high-DPI displays
- New bitmap font rendering of &quot;DejaVu Sans&quot; to be used on <i>dark</i> backgrounds, which better captures sub-pixel AA compared to the regular rendering, i.e. &quot;Bitmap&quot; vs&quot; Darkmap&quot;.
- More robust <a href="code://PNGReadWriter">PNG</a> decoding
- Adds convenient <a href="code://DisplayScreen class &gt;&gt; #setNewScreenSize:">interface</a> to set the host window size accurately
- Some clean-up in the <a href="code://ToolSet browseHierarchy: AbstractFont selector: nil">AbstractFont</a>, StrikeFont, TTCFont hierarchy
- Some performance optimizations to support <a href="http://www.squeaksource.com/NuScratch.html">Scratch</a> on the Raspberry Pi platform
- Specify a <a href="code://Form &gt;&gt; #scaledToSize:smoothing:">smoothing factor</a> when scaling forms
- For TrueType fonts, use all glyphs and not just 256

<i>Multilingual</i>
- Speed-up language environment startup
- Few improvements for Unicode handling

<i>Compiler</i>
- Several fixes and clean-up in Compiler, Decompiler, Parser, and Encoder
- Improved support for custom (Etoys) compilers
- Add option to <a href="code://#wantsInteractiveErrorCorrection">avoid interactive error correction</a> when parsing and compiling code
- Improves debugging support for optimized block temps

<i>Environments</i>
- Embed help in Squeak&apos;s help browser
- Some serialization <a href="http://lists.squeakfoundation.org/pipermail/squeak-dev/2014-September/180018.html">fixes</a>
- Adds <a href="code://Environment &gt;&gt; #collect:">Environment &gt;&gt; \#collect:</a>

<i>Kernel</i>
- Adds support for saving block closures on <a href="code://DataStream">DataStream</a>
- Fix simulation of the <a href="code://#withArgs:executeMethod:">\#withArgs:executeMethod:</a> and <a href="code://#tryPrimitive:withArgs:">\#tryPrimitive:withArgs:</a> primitives, as well as providing support for <a href="code://#tryPrimitiveFor:receiver:args:">\#tryPrimitiveFor:receiver:args:</a> when it is implemented
- New <a href="code://Mutex">Mutex</a> and <a href="code://Monitor">Monitor</a> primitives and functional debugging support for them
- Adds support for VMs to provide real <a href="code://EventSensor &gt;&gt; #processMouseWheelEvent:">mouse-wheel</a> events
- Adds <a href="code://MethodContext &gt;&gt; #actualStackSize">MethodContext &gt;&gt; \#actualStackSize</a>
- Accelerate <a href="code://#bitAnd:">\#bitAnd:</a> in case of negative <a href="code://SmallInteger">SmallInteger</a> receiver and <a href="code://LargePositiveInteger">LargePositiveInteger</a> operand
- Fix detection and clean-up of uni-classes, which is an auto-generated class that has just one instance
- Stop sounds/music on user interruption via [CMD]+[.] again
- More robust user interruption via [CMD]+[.] because CogVMs do not yield preempted processes. That makes &quot;<a href="code://[ [] repeat] fork">[ [] repeat] fork</a>&quot; interruptable again
- Nicer display of <a href="code://Integer &gt;&gt; #tinyBenchmarks">Integer &gt;&gt; \#tinyBenchmarks</a> results: 110,000,000 bytecodes/sec; 1,200,000 sends/sec
- Remove InputSensor for the sake of <a href="code://EventSensor">EventSensor</a>, deprecate several peek\* methods to encourage queue-based event processing in UI frameworks
- Adds <a href="code://Integer &gt;&gt; #integerPart">Integer &gt;&gt; \#integerPart</a> and <a href="code://Integer &gt;&gt; #fractionPart">Integer &gt;&gt; \#fractionPart</a>
- Adds <a href="code://CompiledMethod &gt;&gt; #withoutPrimitive">CompiledMethod &gt;&gt; \#withoutPrimitive</a>
- Several fixes for serialization of basic data types in a 64-bit Spur VM
- <a href="code://Random">Random</a> improvements ;-)
- Adds support for <a href="code://Class &gt;&gt; #ephemeronSubclass:instanceVariableNames:classVariableNames:poolDictionaries:category:">ephemeron</a> classes to improve object finalization in the future
- Increase the maximum of literals in a method to <a href="code://CompiledMethod class &gt;&gt; #maxNumLiterals">32767</a>

<i>System</i>
- Improve support for natural language translation via an <a href="code://InternalTranslator">InternalTranslator</a> or <a href="code://GetTextTranslator">GetTextTranslator</a>. For the latter, you have to put the .mo files into the &quot;locale&quot; folder to choose your language via <i>Extras &gt; Language</i>.
- Adds a small lookup table from <a href="code://SystemNavigation authors explore">author names to author initials</a> (and <a href="code://SystemNavigation authorsInverted explore">vice versa</a>) based on historical information. Squeak contributors of all time.
- Adds support for a new way of storing preferences that primarily address visual representations: <a href="code://UserInterfaceTheme">user interface theme</a>. 
- Improves the<b> </b><a href="code://Project"><b>project</b></a><b> architecture</b> and modularization for <a href="code://MorphicProject new enter">Morphic</a> projects and <a href="code://MVCProject new enter">MVC</a> projects. Lays groundwork for new kinds of user interface frameworks. If you enter one kind of project from another kind of project (e.g. Morphic from within MVC), that outer kind will be entered in case of recursive errors instead of showing the emergency evaluator directly.
- Makes MVC unloadable again. Unloading Morphic still needs a little more work.
- Add a reasonable <a href="code://SmalltalkImage &gt;&gt; #lowSpaceThreshold">low-space limit</a> for StackVMs and CogVMs
- Fixes <a href="code://SmartRefStream">SmartRefStream</a> for 64-bit Spur VMs.
- Speed-up <a href="code://SecureHashAlgorithm">SecureHashAlgorithm</a>
- The demo mode (aka. <b>hi-dpi mode</b>) can be <a href="code://Preferences setDemoFonts">enabled</a> and <a href="code://Preferences restoreDefaultFonts">disabled</a> again.

<i>Collections</i>
- Deprecate \#sortBy: in favor of the cleaner implementation <a href="code://#sorted:">\#sorted:</a>
- Some fixes in <a href="code://HtmlReadWriter">HtmlReadWriter</a>
- New <a href="code://Ascii85Converter">Ascii85Converter</a> akin to <a href="code://Base64MimeConverter">Base64MimeConverter</a>
- Several improvements in <a href="code://Heap">Heap</a>
- Adds support for generator-based enumerating interface in <a href="code://Stream &gt;&gt; #collect:">Stream</a>
- Some <b>64-bit</b> improvements in <a href="code://ByteArray">ByteArray</a>
- Makes instances of <a href="code://Text">Text</a> more polymorphic with <a href="code://String">String</a>
- Improved support for <a href="code://WideString">wide-character strings</a>
- Deprecate \#includesSubString: in favor of <a href="code://#includesSubstring:">\#includesSubstring:</a>

<i>Monticello</i>
- In the save dialog, prevent users from discarding commit messages by accident.
- Fixes Monticello history access
- Adds some <a href="code://MCEmptyDiffyVersion">custom warnings</a> for common tasks
- In the save dialog, make <i>reverted</i> items distinct from <i>ignored</i> items
- In the save dialog, adds keyboard shortcut [CMD]+[SHIFT]+[i] to ignore items
- Provide a more descriptive update dialog
- Support multiple update streams per repository

<i>Files</i>
- Adds <a href="code://FileDirectory &gt;&gt; #assureAbsence">FileDirectory &gt;&gt; \#assureAbsence</a> akin to <a href="code://FileDirectory &gt;&gt; #assureExistence">FileDirectory &gt;&gt; \#assureExistence</a>
- Adds <a href="code://FileDirectory &gt;&gt; #directoryNamesMatching:">FileDirectory &gt;&gt; \#directoryNamesMatching:</a> akin to <a href="code://FileDirectory &gt;&gt; #fileNamesMatching:">FileDirectory &gt;&gt; \#fileNamesMatching:</a> 
- Improve file stream write synchronization
- Deprecate CrLfFileStream

<i>Installer</i>
- Update package catalog with a <a href="code://Installer &gt;&gt; #jsonParser">JSON</a> parser
- Removes support for deprecated gestone.com repository

<i>HelpBrowser</i>
- Adds support for <a href="code://DirectoryBasedHelpTopic">directory-based</a> and <a href="code://FileBasedHelpTopic">file-based help</a> topics
- Improves live editing of help topics in the help browser
- Work around broken links when parsing an <a href="code://HtmlHelpTopic">HTML help</a> topic

<i>Sound</i>
- Fixes strange sound bug that occurred when <a href="code://#stopReverb">reverb</a> was disabled
- Improved support for MIDI playback. Includes support for dropping MIDI files into the image and start playing a MIDI via &quot;(<a href="code://ToolSet browseHierarchy: MIDISound selector: nil">MIDISound</a> fromFileNamed: &apos;some.mid&apos;) play&quot;.
- Fixes sound playing in the way that it goes through the <a href="code://SoundService">SoundService</a> to ensure sound preferences.

<i>ToolBuilder (Kernel, Morphic, MVC)</i>
- Adds specific control for filterable lists and filter clearing per list widget
- Adds (resp. restores) support for <a href="code://PluggableDialogWindow">pluggable dialogs</a>
- Adds specific control for scroll bar policies per list/tree/text widget
- Improves drag-and-drop mechanism in pluggable lists/trees.
- For MVC, <a href="code://MVCToolBuilder &gt;&gt; #buildPluggableTree:">fall back to lists</a> when creating trees because there is no tree view

<i>Morphic</i>
- Fixes object explorer representation of <a href="code://OrderedDictionary &gt;&gt; #explorerContents">OrderedDictionary</a>
- Make error handling in Morphic drawing code more robust by <a href="code://WorldState &gt;&gt; #displayWorldSafely:">collecting errors</a> and only presenting debuggers for different sorts of bugs.
- Speed-up object explorer for large collections
- Make <b>multi-level text undo</b> work again ([CTRL+Z] and [CTRL+SHIFT+Z])
- Adds support for a label to <a href="code://ThreePhaseButtonMorph">ThreePhaseButtonMorph</a> (i.e. check boxes or radio buttons)
- The &quot;smart search&quot; in the main docking bar&apos;s search bar can be disabled now
- Big refactoring of <b>Morphic&apos;s event handling</b> mechanism. Adds support for <a href="code://#filterEvent:for:">event filters</a> and moves handling of <a href="code://#processFocusEvent:using:">focus events</a> into the <a href="code://MorphicEventDispatcher">MorphicEventDispatcher</a>. Event filters are used for implementing reliable keyboard shortcuts. Filters can apply to the event capturing and event bubbling phase. (<a href="code://Morph &gt;&gt; #eventFilterDocumentation">read more</a>)
- Adds <a href="code://MouseWheelEvent">MouseWheelEvent</a>, <a href="code://#handlesMouseWheel:">\#handlesMouseWheel:</a>, and <a href="code://#mouseWheel:">\#mouseWheel:</a> -- keep mapping [CTRL]+[up/down] to mouse-wheel events if the VM does not send real mouse-wheel events
- Improves keyboard focus and <b>window interaction</b> with three (new) preferences: (1) Windows Raise on Click, (2) Windows&apos; Contents are Always Active, and (3) Windows&apos; Controls are Always Active.
- Improves <a href="code://MorphicAlarmQueue">MorphicAlarmQueue</a> to not <i>be</i> a <a href="code://Heap">Heap</a> but <i>use</i> one
- Modularize tool window sharing by moving <a href="code://#representsSameBrowseeAs:">\#representsSameBrowseeAs:</a> into the respective tool packages
- Adds &quot;Enclose selection&quot; as preference to enclose a text selection with brackets etc.
- Several updated keyboard shortcuts for <a href="code://PasteUpMorph &gt;&gt; #filterEvent:for:">the world</a> (<a href="code://PasteUpMorph &gt;&gt;#keystrokeInWorld:">too</a>), <a href="code://DockingBarMorph &gt;&gt; #filterEvent:for:">the main docking bar</a>, <a href="code://SystemWindow &gt;&gt; #filterEvent:for:">system windows</a>, and <a href="code://TextEditor class &gt;&gt; #initializeCmdKeyShortcuts">text editors</a> -- especially [CMD]+[SHIFT]+[D] now does &quot;debug it&quot; instead of &quot;duplicate it&quot; in text editors
- Adds <a href="code://DialogWindow">DialogWindow</a> and use it to implement <a href="code://FillInTheBlankMorph">FillInTheBlankMorph</a> and <a href="code://UserDialogBoxMorph">UserDialogBoxMorph</a>

<i>MorphicExtras</i>
- Adds <a href="code://HistogramMorph">HistogramMorph</a> akin to <a href="code://GraphMorph">GraphMorph</a>
- Make <a href="code://PostscriptCanvas">postscript rendering</a> work again with current default fonts

<i>Tools</i>
- Fixes a regression in the debugger notification window
- Speed-up code browsing with icons enabled
- Fixes an issue with <a href="code://Preferences class &gt;&gt; #balloonHelpInMessageLists">balloon help in message lists</a> in the <a href="code://FileContentsBrowser">FileContentsBrowser</a>

<i>PreferenceBrowser</i>
- Adds a simple <a href="code://PreferenceWizardMorph open">preference wizard</a> (or assistant) to configure many important settings on first image start
- Fixes mouse wheel scrolling due to the use of event filters
- Minor UI fixes to make the preference browser look more like other tools in the system

<i>MVC (ST80)</i>
- There are several fixes and clean-ups in conjunction with the projects refactoring mentioned above. Except for the ones using a tree widget, tools should also work in MVC land. MVC can always be used to debug serious issues in Morphic.
- Simplifies loading and <a href="code://MVCProject class &gt;&gt; #unloadMVC">unloading MVC</a>.
- Removes two-tone cache optimization for system windows to fix drawing glitches in font rendering

<i>SUnit Testing</i>
- Adds a new SUnit extension for tests which <a href="code://TestCase &gt;&gt; #ensureInternetConnection">require an internet connection</a>

<i>ReleaseBuilder</i>
- Clean-up and automation to simplify and <a href="code://ReleaseBuilder class &gt;&gt; #step1FeatureFreeze">guide</a> the release building process
- Adds help scripts to <a href="code://ReleaseBuilder class &gt;&gt; #fileOutChangesBetweenReleases">write release notes</a> more quickly
- Use the <a href="code://ReleaseBuilder class &gt;&gt; #startUp:">\#startUp:</a> method to process deferred tasks or tasks after saving and not closing the image.
- Adds a check for <a href="code://ReleaseBuilder class &gt;&gt; #checkForUndeclaredSymbols">undeclared</a> symbols in source code
- Adds a script to <a href="code://ReleaseBuilder class &gt;&gt; #copyPackagesFrom:to:depth:">copy packages</a> from one repository into another

<i>Regex-Core</i>
- Adds support for regular expressions to the Squeak base image based on <a href="http://www.squeaksource.com/Regex">VB-Regex</a>. 
- Fixes many bugs in <a href="code://RxParser">RxParser</a>, <a href="code://RxMatcher">RxMatcher</a>, <a href="code://RxMatchOptimizer">RxMatchOptimizer</a>, etc. based on the experience with that regular expression package in Pharo.

<b>Known Issues</b>
- List filtering in multi-selection lists may break sometimes, i.e. in the <a href="code://TestRunner open">TestRunner</a>
- Collecting colors via <a href="code://Form &gt;&gt; #collectColors:">Form &gt;&gt; \#collectColors:</a> might lead to unexpected results because the Color black will be treated as transparent color <a href="code://Color class &gt;&gt; #colorFromPixelValue:depth:">here</a>.
- There will be a stack overflow when creating collections with a negative size, like &quot;<a href="code://String new: -1">String new: -1</a>&quot;.
- Some of the more recent Cocoa-based macOS VMs have issues with key-up and key-down events in combination with modifier keys (CTRL, ALT, CMD).
- Depending on the VM version on a Windows platform, there are several key-stroke events not provided such as &quot;CTRL key stroked&quot;.
- <a href="code://SqueakSSL">SqueakSSL</a> has no <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subject_Alternative_Name">SAN</a> support for all platforms. This can be the reason why <a href="code://(WebClient httpGet: &apos;https://www.github.com&apos;) explore">https://www.github.com</a> cannot be accessed but <a href="code://(WebClient httpGet: &apos;https://github.com&apos;) explore">https://github.com</a> works.
- There can be issues when using interface <a href="code://Project current chooseNaturalLanguage. 42">languages</a> other than English due to automatic translation. This will be addressed in future releases.
- You cannot apply a user interface theme from within <a href="code://MVCProject new enter">MVC</a>.

<b>Compatibility Notes</b>
- Several classes and methods were <a href="code://(MCPackage named: &apos;51Deprecated&apos;) workingCopy browse">deprecated</a> and will be removed in the future.
- CI scripts have to aware that <a href="code://MCMcmUpdater class">MCMcmUpdater class</a> does no longer respond to \#updateFromServer\*.
- Handling focus events was moved from <a href="code://Morph &gt;&gt; #handleFocusEvent:">Morph &gt;&gt; \#handleFocusEvent:</a> into <a href="code://MorphicEventDispatcher">MorphicEventDispatcher</a>. See current implementation of <a href="code://Morph &gt;&gt; #handleFocusEvent:">Morph &gt;&gt; \#handleFocusEvent:</a>. You now have to implement <a href="code://#processFocusEvent:using:">\#processFocusEvent:using:</a>, which is more consistent with <a href="code://#processEvent:using:">\#processEvent:using:</a>.
- The use of event listeners is discouraged. Use event filters instead.
- Many pop-up &quot;menus&quot; for <a href="code://MorphicUIManager &gt;&gt; #chooseFrom:lines:title:">choosing from a list of items</a> got replaced with a dialog in Morphic. Still, those dialogs can be dismissed with the [Esc] key or by clicking somewhere in the world. All other (real) state-based pop-up menus remain.
- In the course of introducing user interface themes, <i>window color specifications were removed</i>. Custom tools have to implement <a href="code://#defaultWindowColor">\#defaultWindowColor</a> now to get a color <b>if</b> the particular UI theme does not <a href="code://SqueakTheme class &gt;&gt; #addWindowColors:">account for</a> that particular tool.
